---
published: true
layout: post
title: The Legal Implications of Antique Typhoon's Intrusion Into Microsoft & The U.S. State Department
date: 2024-06-21
description: An informal discussion of Antique Typhoon's attack on Microsoft systems and email accounts associated with U.S State Department employees as well as the laws that were likely broken along the way. 
tags: law cyberlaw opinion china storm0558 antiquetyphoon apt
categories: Opinion
thumbnail: 

related_publications: true

# {% cite duggal_future_2016 --file 2024-05-15-importance-of-cyberlaw.bib %}

# {% cite  %}

---


**Disclaimer:** *While I discuss U.S. laws in this article, I am not a lawyer and anything I write about law (or anything else for that matter) should be taken as my opinion and speculation, not as a statement of legal fact. Certainly nothing I write should be taken as legal advice.*

**Note:** *I refer to a threat group as “Storm-0558” throughout this article, but since the time of writing Microsoft has begun tracking this group under the name “Antique Typhoon”*

## The attack and initial fallout

On July 11th, 2023, the Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC) published a blog post announcing that they had mitigated an attack targeting Microsoft Cloud email accounts at 25 organizations across the world {% cite msrc_microsoft_2023a %}. Specifically, the attackers had seemed quite interested in U.S. government activity, targeting U.S. government agencies and adjacent organizations. Among the accounts hacked were those of U.S. Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia Daniel Kritenbrink, and U.S. Envoy to China Nicholas Burns {% cite freed_chinese_2023 %}.

Microsoft Threat Intelligence has said that the attacking group is based in China and assessed that its methods, OpSec, tradecraft, and objectives seem consistent with state-sponsored espionage {% cite mti_analysis_2023 %}. They have dubbed the group *Storm-0558* and differentiated it from previously identified Chinese state-sponsored hacking groups like APT31, APT41, APT10, and Salt Typhoon. Storm-0558 gained access to accounts by forging authentication tokens and using them via the Outlook Web Access web application {% cite msrc_microsoft_2023a %}. The precise details are a little murky even in Microsoft's own posts about the attack, but the exploit used by the attackers required use of a Microsoft account (MSA) key that they had obtained by compromising a Microsoft employee's account in a phishing campaign. The MSA key in question was never supposed to be saved by Microsoft but was accidentally included in a crash-dump log back in 2021 {% cite msrc_results_2023b %}. The stolen MSA key was then somehow accessed by the attackers and used to cryptographically sign Azure Active Directory authentication tokens that allowed access to enterprise email accounts. The attackers accessed select accounts for more than a month in 2023 and exfiltrated over 60,000 emails during that time. U.S. sources say that none of the emails contained classified or even sensitive information.

**Update:** *If you'd like to know more about the actual attack, I have since written another [post on the topic](/blog/2024/storm-0558-APT/). I'd also highly recommend reading the detailed reports from MSRC, which you can find in my references.*

As of June 2024, no official criminal proceedings have been brought as a result of this attack. Given the international nature of the attack and the fact that the attackers were probably working for Chinese intelligence, it is unlikely that any of the hackers will serve time or face consequences for this breach. However, these types of hurdles have not stopped the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) from issuing indictments against state-sponsored hackers in the past.

## Which Laws Were Broken By Storm-0558?

It is obvious that it is illegal to hack into a large corporation and then leverage that access to read State Department employee's emails, but it is less obvious exactly which laws make those actions illegal. To get an idea of which laws could be applied to the actions of threat actors in this case, I researched indictments issued for similar cases.

In one similar case, in 2017, the DOJ released indictments for four Russian nationals associated with the FSB (the domestic wing of Russian Intelligence) for allegedly hacking Yahoo email accounts {% cite doj_office_2017 %}. The 2017 case differs in many ways from Storm-0558's 2023 attack, but some of the charges in the indictment seem like they could be applied to the members of Storm-0558. For example, it seems likely that the members of Storm-0558 violated *18 USC §1030. Fraud and related activity in connection with computers* which contains many specific criteria for violation, but in essence prohibits unauthorized access to any protected computers, including those containing information from any department of the United States {% cite 18_usc_1030_1986 %}. They also probably violated *18 USC §1028. Fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents, authentication features, and information* {% cite 18_usc_1028_1998 %},  *18 USC §1028A. Aggravated identity theft* {% cite 18_usc_1028A_2004 %}, and *18 USC §1029. Fraud and related activity in connection with access devices* {% cite 18_usc_1029_1984 %}. The reasons that I believe they violated these laws are, respectively, because they forged authentication tokens to impersonate another person, they committed a felony while impersonating another person, and they created, possessed, and used "counterfeit" authentication tokens, i.e. access devices.

## Could Microsoft Be Under Legal Threat Too?

 U.S. Senator Ron Wyden {% cite wyden_letter_2023 %} wrote a letter to Jen Easterly, Director of CISA, Lina Khan, Chairwoman of the FTC, and Merrick Garland, U.S. Attorney General asking them to investigate Microsoft in relation to the email breach. He specifically asks Garland to determine if Microsoft broke federal contract laws, Khan to investigate privacy laws, and points out that by being negligent in this case Microsoft may have broken a court order from 2002 regarding a different security incident. Wyden doesn't specify laws that he thinks Microsoft has broken, but I think some contenders are *The Federal Trade Commission Act* {% cite 15_usc_41-58_1914 %}, *The Children's Online Privacy Protection Act* {% cite 15_usc_6501-6505_1998 %}, and *The Electronic Communications Privacy Act* {% cite 18_usc_2510-2523_1986 %}.

To make matters worse for Microsoft, they weren't even the ones who discovered the attack, instead they were notified by the U.S. State Department's cybersecurity team {% cite goswami_microsoft_2023 %}. Furthermore, Microsoft was charging a premium fee for access to the types of logs that allowed the State Department's team to notice the attack. Customers who paid for the cloud email services, but not for the premium logging, had absolutely no way to know they were under attack. After looking through logs of one of the victim organizations that did not pay Microsoft for premium logs, Incident responder Steven Adair said in an interview "you couldn't convince me anything in here is out of the ordinary and I would never suspect a breach and I'm looking for one" {% cite temple-raston_what_2023 %}. All this is to say, Microsoft may be in some legal trouble after this incident. Between leaking the MSA key, not being able to detect the breach themselves, and charging a premium for access to the logs that contained evidence of the breach, they are already appearing pretty weak, at least in the court of public opinion
